[Music]
sacrifice
you get to pick your damn sacrifice
that's all you don't get to not make one
you're sacrificial whether you want to
be or not
this is the peter pan story roughly
speaking is peter pan is this magical
boy
pan means pan is the god of everything
roughly speaking right and so
it's not an accident that he has the
name pan
and he's the boy that won't grow up and
he's magical well that's because
children are magical they can be
anything
they're nothing but potential and
peter pan doesn't want to give that up
why
well he's got some adults around him but
the main adult is captain hook
well who the hell wants to grow up to be
captain hook first of all you've got a
hook
second you're a tyrant and third you're
chased by the
dragon of chaos with a clock in its
stomach right the crocodile it's already
got a piece of you well that's what
happens when you get older
time has already got a piece of you and
eventually it's got a taste for you and
eventually it's going to eat you
and so hook is so traumatized by that
that he can't help
but be a tyrant and then peter pan looks
at
traumatized hook and says well no i'm
not sacrificing my childhood for that
so that's fine except he ends up king of
lost boys
in neverland well neverland doesn't
exist and who the hell wants to be king
of the lost boys and he also sacrifices
the possibility to have a real
relationship with a woman because that's
wendy
right and she's kind of conservative
middle class
london dwelling girl she wants to grow
up and have kids and have a life she
accepts her mortality
she accepts her maturity peter pan has
to content himself with tinkerbell
she doesn't even exist she's like she's
like
the fairy of porn she doesn't exist
she's the substitute for the real thing
and so
but the dichotomy that you're talking
about it's very tricky because
there's a sacrificial element in
maturation
right you have to sacrifice the plural
potentiality
of childhood for the actuality of a
frame
and the question is well why would you
do that well one reason is it happens to
you whether you do it or not
you can either choose your damn
limitation
you can let it take you unaware when
you're 30
or even worse when you're 40 and then
that is not
a happy day you see i see people like
this and i think it's more and more
common in our culture because people can
put off
maturity without suffering an immediate
penalty
but all that happens is the penalty
accrues and then when it finally hits it
just wallops you because
when you're 25 you can be an idiot it's
no problem
even when you're out in a job search
it's like well you don't have any
experience and you're kind of clueless
it's yeah yeah you're young you know
it's no problem we can
that's what young people are like but
they're full of potential okay well now
you're the same person at 30.
it's like people aren't so thrilled
about you at that point it's like what
the hell have you been doing for the
last 10 years
well i'm just as clueless as i was when
i was 22. yeah but you're not
22. you're an old infant
right and that's an ugly thing an old
infant
so the the re part of the reason you
choose your damn sacrifice
because the sacrifice is inevitable
but at least you get to choose it and
then there's something that's that's
even more complex than that in some
sense is that
the problem with being a child is that
all you are is potential and it's really
low resolution you could be anything but
you're not anything
so then you go and you adopt an
apprenticeship
roughly speaking and then you become at
least you become
something and when you're something that
makes the world open up to you again
you know like if you're a really good
plumber
then you end up being far more than a
plumber right you end up being a good
employer
not not that plumbers i'm not putting
plumbers down it's like more power to
plumbers
they've saved more lives than doctors so
hygiene right so you know if you're a
really good plumber well then you have
some employees you run a business you
you make
you you train some other people you
enlarge their lives you're kind of a
pillar of the community you
you have your family it's you can once
you pass through that narrow
training period which narrows you and
constricts you and develops you at the
same time then you can come out the
other end with
a bunch of new possibility at hell at
hand
and jung talked about that he thought
that the proper
part of the proper path of development
in the last half of life was to
rediscover
the child that you left behind as you
were apprenticing
and so then you get to be something and
regain that potential at the same time
very very smart well he was very very
smart so that's
very wise very wise thing to know
sacrifice you get to pick your damn
sacrifice
that's all you don't get to not make one
you're sacrificial whether you want to
be or not that's a good thing to know as
well
[Music]
dostoevsky said that in notes from the
underground a great great book and
you know he said i love this it was his
an early critic
criticism of the notion of a political
utopia
he said look if you gave people
everything they wanted
they had nothing to eat but cake and
nothing to do but sit in warm pools and
busy themselves with the continuation of
the species
that was his his lines that the first
thing they would do well maybe after the
first week was
like go kind of half insane and smash
everything up just so that something
that they didn't expect would happen so
that they'd have something interesting
to do
and it's it's so right because you know
the the utopian notion that if you just
had all the material
stuff you wanted that you'd you'd be
well what would you be what would you do
would you just sit on the couch and
watch tv i mean you'd you'd be i don't
know what you'd be cutting yourself
just for entertainment in no time flat
you know and that's the sort of thing
that people do
and so we're not adapted for
security and utopia we're adapted for a
certain amount of security because you
know we are vulnerable but
mostly we want to have one foot out
where we don't know what the hell is
going on
because that's where you're alert and
alive and tense
and with it and and you know i think
i believe this and i believe it actually
has something to do with the hemispheric
structure
of the physiology of your brain is
because the right hemisphere looks
roughly
adapted to what you don't know and the
left hemisphere and this is a very this
is an oversimplification but a useful
one
is adapted to the world that you do know
and the right place for you to be is
halfway between them
because then you can tell that that's
what's so cool and
this tells you that this is actually
reality that's manifesting itself to you
you know that sense of active engagement
you have in the world when things are
working well for you you know where
you're
where you should be at the right time
you're alert
and on top of things and engaged and you
don't have much of a sense of
time and the sense of the tragedy of
life sort of recedes and that's when
you're
that's when you've got one foot when
it's where it's secure and one foot out
in the unknown
and your brain signals to you that
you're in the right place by making what
you're doing meaningful
and that sense of meaning is actually a
neurophysiological signal that you've
got the forces of the cosmos
properly balanced in your being at that
moment and that's why it feels so good
now what else could it possibly be i
mean
you know our our brain is capable of
looking beyond our vision
that's what it's for and that sense of
engagement there's no reason to assume
that that's anything but a real signal
and you can reduce it you could say well
the problem with being where
you know only is that you don't know
everything
and that's going to be a problem in the
future and the problem with being where
you know nothing is that's just too much
man like
you know you go into panic mode and
because anything can happen there and
you can't handle it
so you've got to mediate between those
two things you want to be secure enough
so that your physiology isn't
revving out of control and you want to
be out there in the unknown enough so
that you keep updating yourself
constantly constantly constantly and
that's
that's the place where information flow
is maximized
and you know that because that's where
you are when you're having a really
interesting conversation with someone or
you're gripped by a book
or you're really into a movie or maybe
something that you do as a you know
apart from your work or maybe even in
your work you're
into it and that's because you are in
the right place at the right time and
your whole nervous system is signaling
that to you
and i would say that's the sort of place
that you should be all the time
of course you can't be because no one's
perfect but it's
that's that's the recreation of paradise
on earth it's something like it because
you are in the right place at the right
time when that is happening
and so we're mobile creatures right we
need to know where we're going
because all we're ever concerned about
roughly speaking is where we're going
that's what we need to know where are we
going what are we doing and why
it turns out that the way that we're
constructed neurophysiologically is that
we don't experience any positive emotion
unless we have an aim and we can see
ourselves progressing towards that aim
it isn't precisely attaining the aim
that makes us happy as you all know if
you've ever attained anything because
as soon as you attain it then the whole
little game ends
then you have to come up with another
game right so it's it's sisyphus
and that's okay but but it does show
that the attainment can't be the thing
that drives you because it collapses the
game
that's what happens when you graduate
from university it's like you're king of
the mountain
for one day and then you're like surf at
at starbucks for the next five years you
know so
yeah so what happens is that that
human beings are weird creatures because
we're much more activated
by having an aim and moving towards it
than we are by attainment and what that
means is you have to have an aim
and that means you have to have an
interpretation and it also means that
the nobler the aim that's one way of
thinking about it
the better your life and that's a really
interesting thing to know because you
know
you've heard ever since you were tiny
that you should act like a good person
and
you shouldn't lie for example and you
might think well why the hell should i
act like a good person and why not lie i
mean even a three-year-old can ask that
question because smart
smart kids learn to lie earlier by the
way and they think well
why not twist the fabric of reality so
that it serves your
specific short-term needs i mean that's
a great question why not do that
why act morally if you can get away with
something and it
brings you closer to something you want
well why not do it
these are good questions it's not
self-evident well
it seems to me tied in with what i just
mentioned it's like
you destabilize yourself and things
become chaotic that's not good
and if you don't have a noble aim then
you have nothing but
but shallow trivial
pleasures and they don't sustain you
and that's not good because because life
is so difficult so much
it's so much suffering it's so complex
it ends
and everyone dies and it's painful it's
like without a noble aim how can you
withstand any of that
you can't you become desperate and once
you become desperate things
go things go from bad to worse very
rapidly when you become desperate and so
there's the idea of the noble aim
and it's it's not something it's it's
something that's necessary it's the
bread that people cannot live without
right that's not physical bread it's the
noble aim
and what is that well it's to pay
attention it's to speak properly it's to
confront chaos
it's to make a better world it's
something like that
and that's enough of a noble aim so that
you can stand up
without you know cringing at the very
thought of your own existence so that
you can do something that's worthwhile
to justify your wretched
position on the planet and whatever it
is
that is you has this capacity to
experience
reality and to transform it which is
very strange thing you know
you can conceptualize a future in your
imagination
and then you can work and make that
manifest you participate in the process
of creation
it's an amazing idea because it gives
consciousness
a constitutive role in the cosmos
[Music]
the conditions of human life are such
that suffering is an integral part of
existence
now it's an important thing to
understand it's also
a viewpoint shared by the bulk of the
great religious systems of the world
life is suffering why well
one reason is because of society's
arbitrary judgment
right every single one of us
has traits and features and
and quirks and idiosyncrasies that are
far from ideal and that are judged by
the standards of society as insufficient
and so you suffer because of your
imperfect
insufficiency in the eyes of others and
you can certainly
make the claim that fairly frequently
that's arbitrary and so that's the claim
that
society is tyrannical and judgmental and
needs to be
constantly re constituted so that
the tyrannical element doesn't take full
control
and fair enough you have to stay awake
so that that doesn't happen
but the thing is it doesn't matter what
society it is although they vary in the
degree of their tyranny
the mere fact that you're grouped
together with other people and have to
come up with a common value structure in
order to live together
means that many of the things that
characterize you are going to be
sub-optimal
and so the price you pay for social
being
is that much of you is deemed
insufficient
now hopefully there are various ways
that you can be within a society that's
sufficiently diverse
so that you can find a place where
what's good about you in the eyes of
others and perhaps in your own eyes can
flourish
of its own accord because you don't have
to be good at everything if you can be
good at
at one thing well enough that might
allow you your niche
and hopefully a healthy society allows
for that certainly societies can become
so tyrannical that they don't
so you can lay one source of human
suffering at the feet of tyrannical
social structures but
the other element of it clearly is the
mere fact of the
arbitrariness of the natural world if
you have a lifespan that's going to be
counted in the number of
decades that you can count on two hands
and that has nothing to do technically
with the tyranny of the social structure
now you could say
if we got our act together more
completely perhaps you could live longer
and fair enough but
the fact of the limits of your lifespan
and the suffering that's necessarily a
consequence of that the death of your
parents and the death of most people
that you will know
before you means that that part of
suffering is
an integral part of existence itself
and so that can't be laid at the feet of
an insufficient social structure except
insofar as it's tyrannical and blind
it's a condition of existence and then
by the same token you have
your own responsibility for some of your
unnecessary suffering because there's
things you could be doing
to make your life better and to make
life better for other people
that you know perfectly well that you're
not doing and so
if you stopped doing all the unnecessary
things that make your life bad then
it would improve to some degree that is
not really computable because you don't
know how far you could push that
so there's three reasons why you suffer
and one is
well look at you and the way you're
built it's inevitable there's not very
much of you and there's a lot of
everything else
and so you just don't last that long and
you're fragile across multiple domains
and then
you're harshly treated by society and
there's no doubt about that and then
there's responsibility that can be laid
at your own feet
well the existential take on that and
the thing that all these diverse people
that we've been talking about including
victor franklin including alexander
solzhenitsyn
as well as um uh kierkegaard nietzsche
and dostoevsky and the people that i've
already talked to you about is that
the proper pathway through that
is to adopt the mode of
authentic being and that is something
like
refusing to participate in the lie
in deception in the lie to orient your
speech as much as you can
towards the truth and to take
responsibility for your own life and
perhaps also for the lives of other
people
and there's something about that that's
meaningful
and responsible and noble but also
serves to mitigate the very suffering
that
produces say the nihilism or the flea
into the arms of flea
or or the or the escape into the arms of
totalitarians to begin with
you need something to shelter you
against your own vulnerability
and you can adopt a comprehensive
description of reality that's formulated
for you by someone else
that neatly divides the world into those
who are innocent and perhaps
innocent victims and those who are
guilty and perhaps the perpetrators of
the suffering
but none of that has anything to do with
you and in addition it's
simply not it's not a reasonable way of
assessing the world that the suffering
is built
in so that's why the there's an
existentialist insistence upon that so
that for the freudians the
psychoanalysts and
even for people like carl rogers to some
degree
if you're in a situation that's
characterized by psychopathology if
there's something wrong with you
mentally
that's a consequence of something gone
wrong but that's not the existentialist
take the existentialist take is no
that's just how it is
that's just how it is you don't have to
necessarily have done anything wrong for
things to get completely out of control
it's a terrifying doctrine but it's not
a hopeless doctrine because it still
says that there's a way forward there's
a pathway forward and the
pathway forward is to adopt a motive
being that has some nobility
so that you can tolerate yourself and
perhaps even have some respect for
yourself as someone
who's capable of standing up in the face
of that terrible vulnerability and
suffering and that the pathway forward
as far as the existentialists are
concerned
is by well certainly by the avoidance of
deceit
particularly in language but also by the
adoption of
responsibility for the conditions of
existence and some attempt on your part
to actually rectify them
and the thing that's so interesting
about that is that well two as far as
i'm concerned
and some of this is from clinical
experience you know if you take people
and i've told you this and you expose
them voluntarily to things that they are
avoiding and are afraid of you know that
they know they need to overcome in order
to meet their goals their self-defined
goals
if you can teach people to stand up in
the face of the things they're afraid of
they get stronger and you don't know
what the upper limits to that are
because you might ask yourself like
if for 10 years if you didn't avoid
doing what you knew you needed to do
by the depth by your own definitions
right within the value structure that
you've created
to the degree that you've done that what
would you be like
well you know there are remarkable
people who come into the world from time
to time and there are people who do
find out over decades-long periods what
they could be like if they were who they
were
if they said if they spoke their being
forward and they get stronger and
stronger and stronger and we don't know
the limits to that we do not know the
limits to that
and so you could say well in part
perhaps the reason that you're suffering
unbearably
can be left at your feet because you're
not everything you could be and you know
it
and of course that's a terrible thing to
admit and it's a terrible thing to
consider
but there's real promise in it right
because it means that
perhaps there's another way that you
could look at the world and the number
another way that you could
act in the world so what it would
reflect back to you would be much better
than what it reflects back to you now
and then the second part of that is well
imagine that many people did that
because
we've done a lot as human beings we've
done a lot of remarkable things and i've
told you already
i think before that today for example
about 250
000 people will be lifted out of abject
poverty and about 300
000 people attached to the electrical
power grid we're making people
we're lifting people out of poverty
collectively at a faster rate that's
ever occurred in the history of
humankind by a huge margin and that's
been going on unbelievably quickly since
the year 2000
the u.n had planned to have poverty
between 2000 and 2015
and it was accomplished by 2013. so
there's
inequality developing in many places and
you hear lots of political agitation
about that
but overall the the tide is lifting
everyone up and that's a great thing
we have no idea how fast we could
multiply that if people got their act
together and really aimed at it
because you know my my experience is
with people that we're probably running
at about 51 percent of our capacity
something i mean you can think about
this yourselves i often ask
undergraduates how many hours a day you
waste or how many hours a week you waste
and
the classic answer is something like
four to six hours a day
you know inefficient studying uh
watching things on youtube that not only
do you not want to watch that you don't
even care about that make you feel
horrible about watching after you're
done
that's probably four hours right there
you know you think well that's
20 25 hours a week it's 100 hours a
month that's two and a half full work
weeks
it's half a year of work weeks per year
and if your time is worth
twenty dollars an hour which is a
radical underestimate it's probably more
like 50
if you think about it in terms of
deferred wages if you're wasting
20 hours a week you're wasting 50 000
a year and you are doing that right now
and it's because you're young wasting 50
000 a year is a way bigger catastrophe
than it would be for me to waste it
because i'm not going to last nearly as
long and so if your life isn't
everything it could be you could ask
yourself well
what would happen if you just stopped
wasting the opportunities that are in
front of you
you'd be who knows how much more
efficient 10 times more efficient
20 times more efficient that's the
pareto distribution
you have no idea how efficient efficient
people get
it's completely it's off the charts
well and if we all got our act together
collectively and stop making
things worse because that's another
thing people do all the time
not only do they not do what they should
to make things better
they actively attempt to make things
worse because they're spiteful or
resentful
or arrogant or deceitful or or homicidal
or genocidal or all of those things all
bundled together in an absolutely
pathological package
if people stopped really really trying
just to make things worse
we have no idea how much better they
would get just because of that
so there's this weird dynamic that's
part of the existential
system of ideas between human
vulnerability
social judgment both of which are are
are major causes of suffering and the
failure of individuals to adopt the
responsibility
that they know they should adopt and
that's the thing that's interesting too
is that
it isn't merely that your fate depends
on whether or not you get your act
together and
to what degree you decide that you're
going to live
out your own genuine being it isn't only
your fate
it's the fate of everyone that you're
networked with and so you know you think
well
there's 9 billion 7 billion people in
the world we're going to peak at about 9
billion by the way
and then it'll decline rapidly but seven
billion people in the world and who are
you you're just one little dust mote
among that seven billion and so it
really doesn't matter what you do or
don't do but that's
simply not the case it's the wrong model
because you're at the center
of a network you're a node in a network
of course that's even more true now that
we have social media you'll
you'll know a thousand people at least
over the course of your life
and they'll know a thousand people each
and that puts you one person away from a
million
and two persons away from a billion and
so that's how you're connected and the
things you do
they're like dropping a stone in a pond
the ripples move outward
and they affect things in ways that you
can't fully comprehend and it means that
the things that you do and that you
don't do are far more important than you
think
and so if you act that way of course the
terror of realizing that is that it
actually
starts to matter what you do and you
might say well that's better
than living a meaningless existence it's
better for it to matter
but i mean if you really asked yourself
would you be so sure if you had the
choice
i can live with no responsibility
whatsoever the price i pay is that
nothing matters
or i can reverse it and everything
matters but i have to take the
responsibility that's associated with
that
it's not so obvious to me that people
would take the meaningful path
you know when you say well nihilists
suffer dreadfully because there's no
meaning in their life and they still
suffer yeah but the advantage is they
have no responsibility
so that's the payoff and i actually
think that's the motivation say well i
can't help being nihilistic all my
belief systems have collapsed it's like
yeah maybe maybe you've just allowed
them to collapse because it's a hell of
a lot easier than acting them out
and the price you pay is some
meaningless suffering but you can always
whine about that and people will feel
sorry for you
and you have the option of taking the
pathway of the martyr so that's a pretty
good deal all things considered
especially when they are when the
alternative is to
bear your burden properly and to live
forthrightly in the world well
if you live a pathological life you
pathologize your society
and if enough people do that then it's
hell
really really
i hope you found this animated lecture
selection engaging and useful
and would like to thank the after-school
team for their work
and their generosity i would also like
to extend
to all of those watching and listening a
sincere
invitation to further explore what my
team and i are offering on this youtube
channel my podcast and in my books
your engagement is most welcome and your
attention and interest
most genuinely appreciated
[Music]
you